A Comparator<T> is a Java interface used to define custom sorting logic for objects.

By default, Java knows how to sort primitives (1, 2, 3) or Strings (A, B, C). It does not know how to sort a custom object like Employee or Car. A Comparator tells Java exactly how to evaluate two instances of an object to determine which one should come first.

It relies on a single method: compare(T o1, T o2).

Returns < 0: o1 comes before o2.

Returns 0: o1 and o2 are equal in sorting order.

Returns > 0: o1 comes after o2.

Did Lambdas Replace Them?
No. Lambdas did not replace the Comparator interface. Lambdas replaced the verbose syntax used to write them.

Comparator is a functional interface (it has exactly one abstract method). Java 8 (released in 2014) introduced lambdas specifically to provide a shorter, cleaner way to implement functional interfaces without writing bulky anonymous inner classes.

The Evolution (Why, Where, and When)
Here is exactly how the implementation changed. Assume we are sorting a list of Person objects by their age.

Pre-Java 8: Anonymous Inner Classes (Verbose and bulky)
Before 2014, you had to instantiate the interface directly using an anonymous block.

Java 8+: Lambdas (Short and direct)
Since Comparator only has one method, Java can infer the types and the method signature. You just provide the logic.

Java
List<Person> people = getPeople();

// Sorting with lambdas
people.sort((p1, p2) -> Integer.compare(p1.getAge(), p2.getAge()));
Java 8+: Comparator Helper Methods (Modern standard)
Java 8 also added static helper methods to the Comparator interface itself, combining lambdas and method references to make the code even shorter. This is the current best practice.

Java
List<Person> people = getPeople();

// Sorting using method references and Comparator.comparing
people.sort(Comparator.comparing(Person::getAge));

// Chaining comparators (e.g., sort by age, then by name)
people.sort(Comparator.comparing(Person::getAge)
                      .thenComparing(Person::getName));
Summary: The Comparator engine still drives the sorting logic under the hood in Collections and Streams. Lambdas just stripped away the boilerplate code required to use it.